Practicals 1-4 (#24)
HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course: episodes/practical1.Rmd

We are going to use data from the CT Ventilation as a Functional Imaging Modality for Lung Cancer Radiotherapy dataset (also known as `CT-vs-PET-Ventilation-Imaging dataset`).
It contains 20 lung cancer patients who underwent exhale/inhale breath-hold CT (BHCT), free-breathing four-dimensional CT (4DCT) and Galligas PET ventilation scans in a single session on a combined 4DPET/CT scanner. We won't make use of the 4DCT.

We used the scans from the patient `CT-PET-VI-02`. In the zipped data folder, you can find it under `practical1`. You should have: 

* `inhale_BH_CT` and `exhale_BH_CT`: CT scans acquired during an inhalation breath hold and exhalation breath hold, respectively.
* `PET`: PET scan measuring local lung function.
* `CT_for_PET`: CT scan acquired at the same time as the PET scan for attenuation correction of the PET scan and to provide anatomical reference for the PET data.  

These images are shown below in ITK-SNAP.
![Figure. CT-PET-VI-02 dataset](fig/CT-PET-VI-02.svg)

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Data sharing ethics and policies

> When using open datasets that contain images of humans, such as those from TCIA, for your research, you will still need to get ethical approval as you do for any non-open datasets you use). This can usually be obtained from the local ethics committee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using open datasets that contain images of humans, such as those from TCIA, for your research, you will still need to get ethical approval as you do for any non-open datasets you use. This is usually obtained from the local ethics committee, but tends to be a less involved process for secondary data analysis then it does for original data collection.
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> The first part of this tutorial makes use of the ITK-SNAP software. Make sure you have installed it following the instructions from the Summary and Setup page. For second part is based in Python, and you should use the template Jupyter notebook *practical1-exercises.ipynb*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first part of this tutorial makes use of the ITK-SNAP software. Make sure you have installed it following the instructions from the Summary and Setup page. The second part is based in Python, and you should use the template Jupyter notebook `practical1-exercises.ipynb`. 
```

## 1. Medical imaging formats

> Although there are many formats in which medical imaging data can come, we will focus on DICOM and NIfTI as they are two of the most common formats. Most data from a hospital will be in DICOM format, whereas NIfTI is a very popular format in the medical image analysis community. The files from the TCIA are in DICOM format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although there are many different file formats used in medical imaging, we will focus on two of the most common formats:
* [DICOM](https://www.dicomstandard.org/) (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine)
* [NIfTI](https://nifti.nimh.nih.gov/) (Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative)

Most data from a hospital will be in DICOM format, whereas NIfTI is a very popular format in the medical image analysis community. The files from the TCIA are in DICOM format.
```

### 1.1. DICOM format

> Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) is a technical standard for digitally storing and transmitting medical images and related information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DICOM is a widely used technical standard for digitally storing and transmitting medical images and related information.
```

> While DICOM images typically have a separate file for every slice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DICOM images typically have a separate file for every slice.
```

Furthermore, there are complicated ‘links’ (provided by unique identifiers, UIDs) between the DICOM headers of different files belonging to the same scan or subject. With DICOM routinely storing each slice as a separate file, it makes processing an entire imaging volume stored in DICOM format rather cumbersome, and the extra housekeeping required could lead to a greater chance of an error being made.
Therefore, a common first step of any image processing pipeline is to convert the DICOM image to a more suitable format, such as NIfTI. 
Generally, most conversions go from DICOM to NIfTI. There are scenarios when you might want to convert from NIfTI back to DICOM, for example, if you need to import them into a clinical system that only works with DICOM.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Warning on converting images back to DICOM 
Converting images back to DICOM such that they are correctly interpreted by a clinical system can be very tricky and requires a good understanding of the DICOM standard. 
More information on the DICOM standard can be found here: https://www.dicomstandard.org.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

### 1.2. NIfTI format

> The Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative (NIfTI) image format are usually stored as a single file containing the imaging data and header information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NIfTI image format usually stores all of the imaging data and header information within a single file.
```

### 2.2. Opening and viewing DICOM images
* Open the ITK-SNAP application. 
  * If you have used it before, it will display recent images which you can select to open.
* Load the inhale scan `CT-PET-VI-02/inhale_BH_CT`.
  * If the image you want to open is not listed under recent images, you can open it by clicking the 'Open Image...' button at the bottom right of the window or by clicking on File in the top ribbon, then Open Main Image. When you do this, a small window opens where you can enter the path of the file you want to open or click Browse to search your file explorer.
  * Select the first slice from the inhale_BH_CT folder, which is called 1-001.dcm. Leave the default file format and click `Next`. You will then be asked to select the DICOM series to open, but as this folder only includes one series, you can click `Next`.
  * Check the image summary and click `Finish`.
  * You can also drag and drop a file from the File Explorer to the ITK-SNAP app to open it.

![Figure. ITK-SNAP opening image file](fig/itk-snap-opening-dicoms.svg)
![Figure. ITK-SNAP main window](fig/itk-snap-viewing-dicoms.svg)

### 2.3. Coordinate system

> Different versions of the ITK-SNAP app can have different default orientations for the images. We want our image to be in the RAS orientation. Click on `Tools --> Reorient image` and make sure the orientation is RAS. 

Reviewer: I know this is unlikely to be the case, but do you think it is worth telling people how to change it if it was in fact not RAS?

Reviewer 2: removed the text on coordinate systems from here as to try and explain things properly gets very confusing, and don't want that so early in the lesson. also itk-snap's reorientate function does not work in a very useful/intuitive way (in my opinion) so best not to use it!
I will keep a discussion of RAS vs LPS coordinate systems later in the lesson, and will add a comment about itk-snap further confusing things by using different names (i.e. itk snap uses LPI for RAS)

![Figure. ITK-SNAP Reorient image](fig/itk-snap-tools-reorient-image.png)

### 2.4. Navigating DICOM images
* Navigate around the image and check the intensity value on the cursor inspector.

> * To navigate around the image, you can left-click and drag. To move through the displayed slices, you can use the mouse wheel (or two fingers on the touchpad) or use the slider next to the displayed slice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To navigate around the image, you can left-click and drag the cursor around one of the three planes. To move through the displayed slices, you can use the mouse wheel (or two fingers on the touchpad) or use the slider next to the displayed slice.
```

> * To zoom, you can use the right click and drag. You can move the entire image by using the mouse centre button or alt + left click and drag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To zoom in , you can use the right click and drag the cursor upwards (to zoom out, drag the cursor downwards). You can pan, or move the entire image, by using the mouse centre button or alt + left click and drag (option key + left click for Mac OS).
```

![Figure. ITK-SNAP cursor inspector](fig/itk-snap-cursor-inspector.png)

### 2.5. Handling multiple DICOM images
We provide instructions for handling multiple DICOM images, applying overlays, viewing image information, and using colour maps in ITK-SNAP.
For this example, we use `CT-PET-VI-02/inhale_BH_CT` and `CT-PET-VI-02/exhale_BH_CT` DICOMs.

#### Load additional image
Go to the `exhale_BH_CT` folder in your File Explorer and drag any DICOM files onto the ITK-SNAP window. 
A small window will pop up asking what should ITK-SNAP do with this image. 
If you select `Load as Main Image`, the current image will be replaced. 

> Instead, select `Load as Additional Image` - this will enable easy comparison of the two images.

Reviewer: The fourth box in the image - whether to upload as side by side image or a semitransparent overlay is important to highlight here, as they may not be able to see this in the image if it is too small.

Reviewer 2: i have made all the images of the windows shown during loading images larger so they can be clearly seen

![Figure. ITK-SNAP additional image](fig/itk-snap-additional-image.png)

* Once the second image is loaded, you will see two thumbnails in the top corner of each slice display

> * Click on these to swap the displayed slices from one image to the other, allowing you to easily see the similarities and differences between the images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Click on these to swap the displayed slices from one image to the other, allowing you to easily see the similarities and differences between the images. You can also swap quickly by using the square bracket shortcut keys `[` and `]`
```

* You will also see that both images now appear in the Cursor Inspector, where you can see the intensity value at the cursor for both images. 
* You can also change the displayed image by clicking on it in the Cursor Inspector

![Figure. ITK-SNAP thumbnails, handling two DICOM images (`inhale_BH_CT` and `exhale_BH_CT` for `CT-PET-VI-02`)](fig/itk-snap-thumbnails.png)

#### Colour overlay
Sometimes, you may want to display an image as a colour overlay on top of another image, e.g., a PET image overlaid on the corresponding CT.

##### Colour overlay as a separate image (shown beside other images)
* **Load Primary Image**:
   - Open your primary DICOM series of the `CT-PET-VI-02/CT_for_PET` image either using the drag and drop method or `File -> Open Image` as described above.
	- Make sure the File Format is DICOM Image Series.
	- This time, select Load as Main Image. This will load in the new image, replacing the two that were previously loaded.
* **Load Overlay Image**:

>    - Load the `CT-PET-VI-02/PET` image either using the drag and drop method or `File -> Open Image`

Reviewer: In Mac it is called File-> Add Another Image

Author: my mistake, same in windows. modified in commit 1933036.

> ![Figure. ITK-SNAP thumbnails](fig/itk-snap-colour-overlay-as-separate-image.svg)

Reviewer: Even though we select hot and as a separate image as displayed in this screenshot, this doesn't seem to affect the colormap of the PET. Is that colormap only for the semitransparent overlay?

Reviewer 2: kind of - it seems that setting the colourmap here is intended only for use when loading the image as an overlay - if you leave 'as a separate image' selected and change the colourmap it has no effect.
but... if you select 'as an overlay' and then change the colourmap, it will change the colourmap used for the image - then, before pressing next, change the selection back to 'as a separate image' the colourmap will now be used for the separate image as well. but my guess is this is an unintended feature, and the intention is that the colourmap will only be used when loading the image as an overlay, so that's how i will present it in the tutorial.
tbh, the bits on loading multiple images are the bits that i have most heavily modified, as they were not very clear

### Layer inspector tools
* Load `CT-PET-VI-02/CT_for_PET` and `CT-PET-VI-02/PET` scans using hot semi-transparency (as shown above).
* Go to `Tools -> Layer Inspector`. This opens the Image Layer Inspector window. You will see the two images on the left and five tabs at the window's top.
* The PET image appears in the Cursor Inspector (called Galligas Lung) in italics and the CT image in bold. 

#### General tab
The General tab displays the filename and the nickname for the selected image (click on either `Main Image` or `Additional Images` to display the corresponding information). 

* The nickname can be edited. 
* For the PET image, the General tab also displays a slider to set the opacity and the option to display it as a separate image or semi-transparent overlay. 

![Figure. ITK-SNAP: Layer inspector with general tab](fig/itk-snap-layer-inspector-general-tab.png)

#### Contrast tab
The Contrast tab enables you to adjust how the image intensities are displayed for the different images.

* e.g. Select the lung image and set the maximum value to 1000 (push enter after typing the number). This will make the structures in the lungs easier to see.

> ![Figure. ITK-SNAP: Layer inspector with contrast tab](fig/itk-snap-layer-inspector-contrast-tab.png)

Reviewer: Think it would be a good idea to add how to "undo" or "reset" back to the original contrast settings (I think that is just clicking the Reset button in this tab.

#### Colour map tab
The colour map tab can be used to select and manipulate the colour map.

* Choose a predefined colour map from the list. You might also create a customised map.

> * Adjust the intensity and transparency settings as needed to enhance the visualisation of the images.

Reviewer: I think worth telling them how to get back to the original colormap after they have played with it. It appears that the use just has to re-select "Hot" from the preselects.

* A dialogue box will appear displaying metadata and other relevant information about the loaded DICOM images (e.g. values for image header and cursor coordinates).
* If you look at the info tab for both the CT image and PET image, you will see that the image header information is different, and the cursor coordinates in voxel units for the PET image are not whole numbers. The resolution of the images is different, with the PET image having a coarser grid than the CT. Therefore, ITK-SNAP first displays the CT image, and the overlaid PET image slices are interpolated at the corresponding location.

![Figure. ITK-SNAP: Layer inspector with info tab](fig/itk-snap-layer-inspector-info-tab.png)

#### Metadata tab
The metadata tab contains some of the information from the DICOM header of the images.

![Figure. ITK-SNAP: Layer inspector with metadata tab](fig/itk-snap-layer-inspector-metadata-tab.png)

## 3. Converting DICOM images to NIfTI
As mentioned earlier, working in the NIfTI image format is easier when processing and analysing medical image data.
We will now work on converting DICOM images to a NIfTI image volume. 

### 3.1. Using [SimpleITK](https://simpleitk.org/)

> Many Python packages allow you to convert images from DICOM to NIfTI format. Here, we chose to use the SimpleITK library. You can find the code for converting the images in the Jupyter notebook.

Reviewer: I think we need something here about "Run the chunks of the notebook that are related to this section of the lesson (3.1) and see how to convert DICOM to Nifti". 
I also think we should say at the top of the notebook explicitly that each part of the notebook is meant to tie along to parts of the practical lesson.
And do we have any information about how to open up the notebooks in VS Code?

Reviewer: Finally, I think we should have "This should create a file in your `data/pracitcal1` subdirectory called `ct_for_pet.nii.gz`. Open it up in ITKSnap to see that it looks the same as your DICOM. Next try to write the code to convert other DICOM files to Nifti

nii3ct = nib.load("data/ct_for_pet.nii.gz")
```
-->

The Nifti1Image object allows us to see the size/shape of the image, its data type, and the affine transform that maps from voxel space to world space. Its affine matrix is given below.
```python
[[  -0.9765625    -0.            0.          249.51171875]
 [  -0.           -0.9765625     0.          466.01171875]
 [   0.            0.            2.         -553.5       ]
 [   0.            0.            0.            1.        ]]
```

It also provides access to the complete header information stored in the NIfTI file.

There are two common ways of specifying the affine transformation mapping from voxel coordinates to world coordinates in the NIfTI header, called the `sform` and the `qform`. 
The `sform` directly stores the affine transformation in the header, whereas the `qform` stores the affine transformation using [quaternions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternion). 

We recommend using the `sform` over the `qform` for various reasons:

* It is easier to conceptualise.
* It can contain shears that cannot be represented using the `qform`, which can be helpful when representing affine transformations.

> * Common libraries (including NiBabel) ignore the `qform` if the `sform` is provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Common libraries (including NiBabel) tend to give precedence to the `sform` and use the `qform` only if the `sform` is not provided.
```

Nibabel actually does the following according to the documentation:
1. If sform_code != 0 (‘unknown’) use the sform affine; else
1. If qform_code != 0 (‘unknown’) use the qform affine; else
1. Use the fall-back affine.

intent_code     : none
datatype        : int16
bitpix          : 16
slice_start     : 0
pixdim          : [1.        0.9765625 0.9765625 2.        0.        0.        0.
 0.       ]
vox_offset      : 0.0
scl_slope       : nan
scl_inter       : nan
slice_end       : 0
slice_code      : unknown
xyzt_units      : 10
cal_max         : 0.0
cal_min         : 0.0
slice_duration  : 0.0
toffset         : 0.0
glmax           : 0
glmin           : 0
descrip         : np.bytes_(b'')
aux_file        : np.bytes_(b'')
qform_code      : scanner
sform_code      : scanner
quatern_b       : 0.0
quatern_c       : 0.0
quatern_d       : 1.0
qoffset_x       : 249.51172
qoffset_y       : 466.01172
qoffset_z       : -553.5
srow_x          : [ -0.9765625   0.          0.        249.51172  ]
srow_y          : [  0.         -0.9765625   0.        466.01172  ]
srow_z          : [   0.     0.     2.  -553.5]
intent_name     : np.bytes_(b'')
magic           : np.bytes_(b'n+1')
```

We can get information on this image's `sform` and `qform` from the `sform_code` and `qform_code` fields. These can be set to five different values:

| Code | Label | Meaning |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 0  | unknown | not defined | 

> | 1  | scanner | RAS+ is scanner coordinates | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1  | scanner | RAS+ is defined according to the scanner coordinate system | 
```

| 2  | aligned | RAS+ aligned to some other scan | 
| 3  | talairach | RAS+ in Talairach atlas space | 
| 4  | mni | RAS+ in MNI atlas space | 

We can see in the above header that both `sform` and `qform` are set to scanner. We can check this using the functions `get_sform()` and `get_qform()` which should output the same matrix.

> However, the NIfTI format does not require that the `sform` and `qform` specify the same matrix, and it is not well defined what should be done when they are both provided and are different from each other. Therefore, we choose to use the `sform` and ignore the `qform`, which we set to unknown using the `set_qform()` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the NIfTI format does not require that the `sform` and `qform` specify the same matrix, and depending on the software, it may cause issues if both are provided with the same code but have different matrices. While Nibabel gives `sform` precedence, we are still going to explicitly ignore the `qform` by setting its code to unknown using the `set_qform()` function.
```

Reviewer: I've highlighted that is the **same code but different matrices**. An example option where two different matrices make since as I understand it is if one was to leave the qform in scanner, but then use the sform to map to some standard space, so that you can use either the scanner mapping or the standard space mapping without creating two files.

If we look closer at the `sform`, you can see that it is stored in the `srow_x`, `srow_y`, and `srow_z` fields of the header. 
These specify the top three rows of a 4x4 matrix representing an affine transformation using homogeneous coordinates. 

> The fourth row is not stored as it is always `[0 0 0 1]`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fourth row is not stored as it is always `[0 0 0 1]`. This is true because it makes a lot of mathematical operations involved in mapping coordinates to the right location much easier and quicker
```

You will notice that the `sform` matrix matches the affine transform in the `Nifti1Image` object (`nii3ct.affine`).

### 4.3. Coordinate systems

> #### RAS  

Reviewer: It feels a little weird to mention RAS a few times above and not really talk about it here. Maybe signpost this discussion when you first talk about RAS in the itksnap section?

> In the above `sform` matrix, you will notice that the diagonal elements of the affine matrix match the voxel dimensions (as the affine matrix does not contain any rotations), but the values for the x and y dimensions are negative. This is because the voxel indices increase as you move to the left and posterior of the image/patient, but the NIfTI format assumes a RAS world coordinate system (i.e. the values increase as you move to the right and anterior of the patient). Therefore, the world coordinates decrease as the voxel indices increase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above `sform` matrix, you will notice that the diagonal elements of the affine matrix match the voxel dimensions (as the affine matrix does not contain any rotations), but the values for the x and y dimensions are negative. This is because the voxel indices increase as you move to the left and posterior of the image/patient, but the NIfTI format assumes a RAS world coordinate system (i.e. the values increase as you move to the **Right**,  **Anterior**, and **Superior** of the patient). Therefore, the world coordinates decrease as the voxel indices increase.
```

#### LPS   

> On the other hand, the original DICOM images assume the world coordinate system is LPS (i.e. values increase when moving to the left, posterior, and superior). We can calculate the affine transform from the DICOM headers, instructions are given [here](https://nipy.org/nibabel/dicom/dicom_orientation.html)). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, the original DICOM images assume the world coordinate system is LPS (i.e. values increase when moving to the **Left**, **Posterior**, and **Superior**). We can calculate the affine transform from the DICOM headers, instructions are given [here](https://nipy.org/nibabel/dicom/dicom_orientation.html)). 
```

The new file `ct_for_pet_float32.nii.gz` is larger than `ct_for_pet.nii.gz` (61 MB and 47 MB, respectively) because of the conversion from 16-bit integers to 32-bit floats. 
Both images are compressed, but the compression is more efficient for the floating point image: while a 32-bit floating point variable is twice the size of a 16-bit integer, the floating image is less than double that of the original integer image.

#### Check data types with NiBabel
If you load `ct_for_pet_float32.nii.gz`, you will see that the data type is `float32`, and if you reload `ct_for_pet.nii.gz`, you will see that the data type is still `int16`.

#### ITK-SNAP visualisation of 16-bit integers vs 32-bit floats
Load the `ct_for_pet.nii.gz` image. If you open the `Image Layer Inspector` and go on `Metadata`, you will see that the `bitpix` field is 16. If you now open `ct_for_pet_float32.nii.gz`, `bitpix` is 32.

![Figure. ITK-SNAP: Metadata for 16-bit integers vs 32-bit floats](fig/itk-snap-16-32-bits.svg)

### 5.2. Cropping data

> We are going to crop the image to remove slices that do not contain the patient (background pixels). These background pixels can take up a large amount of memory and are not usually useful for further data processing tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are going to crop the image to remove slices that do not contain the patient (background pixels). These background pixels can take up a large amount of memory and are not usually useful for further data processing tasks. However, there are a few considerations to pay careful attention to when cropping in order to preserve the mapping of the data to world coordinates. 
```

> We are going to crop the image from slice 103 to slice 381 in the x dimension (sagittal slices) and from slice 160 to 340 in the y dimension (coronal slices). Use ITK-SNAP to confirm that cropping the image to these slices will only remove slices that do not contain the patient.

Reviewer: Should we highlight how much memory (uncompressed) this could save - I imagine since mainly background the compression would normally do well in the areas we are cropping out, but it could highlight how much background there is.

If you provide an affine and a header, and the affine differs from the `sform` or `qform` in the header, they will be set to the provided affine and unknown, respectively. 
If the affine is not provided, it is not set from the header but left empty.
So, if any of your downstream processing will make use of the affine, make sure you manually set it from the header either when creating the Nifti1Image object or by calling the set_sform or set_qform functions for the object (which updates the affine as well as setting the `sform`/`qform`). 
Here, we will provide a Nifti1Header object as we want the header for the new image to be based on the uncropped image and will use the form from the header as the affine for the new Nifti1Image.

The cropped image is saved using NiBabel’s save function.

Make sure the original image `ct_for_pet_float32.nii.gz` is loaded in ITK-SNAP. Now load the cropped image as an additional image (separate image). 
You will see that the image has been cropped in the x and y dimensions as expected, but it is shifted relative to the uncropped image.

> ![Figure. ITK-SNAP: Cropped image in ITK-SNAP](fig/itk-snap_ct_for_pet_cropped_nii_gz.png)

Reviewer: I get a slightly different result from the notebook.
<img width="1097" alt="Screenshot 2024-12-06 at 10 53 20" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f62eb344-7d7e-4ad9-8990-0c5bcfcc344f">

![Figure. Misaligned images](fig/itk-snap-misaligned-images.png)

If we perform a registration between these images as they are, it will likely have difficulties as the images are so far out of alignment to start with. One way to roughly align the images before performing a registration is to align the centres of the images by modifying the origin for the 2nd subject such that the image centres for both images have the same world coordinates. This can be done by following these steps:

* Calculate the centre of the image from subject 2 (`ct_for_pet.nii.gz`) in voxel coordinates.
* Calculate the centre of the image from subject 2 in world coordinates.
* Calculate the centre of the image from subject 1 (`inhale_bh_ct.nii.gz`) in voxel coordinates.
* Calculate the centre of the image from subject 1 in world coordinates.
* Calculate the translation (in world coordinates) required to align the images (centre subject 1 = centre subject 2 + translation).
* Add this translation to the origin for subject 2.
* Save the image for subject 2 using the header with the updated origin.

> Try writing code to implement these steps yourself, based on what you have learnt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try writing code to implement these steps yourself, based on what you have learned from this practical.
```
